2021/Day7/Day7.md, before:

[Back](../../README.md)

# --- Day 7: The Treachery of Whales ---
A giant [whale](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sperm_whale) has decided your submarine is its next meal, and it's much faster than you are. There's nowhere to run!

Suddenly, a swarm of crabs (each in its own tiny submarine - it's too deep for them otherwise) zooms in to rescue you! They seem to be preparing to blast a hole in the ocean floor; sensors indicate a **massive underground cave system** just beyond where they're aiming!

The crab submarines all need to be aligned before they'll have enough power to blast a large enough hole for your submarine to get through. However, it doesn't look like they'll be aligned before the whale catches you! Maybe you can help?

There's one major catch - crab submarines can only move horizontally.

You quickly make a list of the **horizontal position of each crab** (your puzzle input). Crab submarines have limited fuel, so you need to find a way to make all of their horizontal positions match while requiring them to spend as little fuel as possible.

For example, consider the following horizontal positions:

    16,1,2,0,4,2,7,1,2,14

This means there's a crab with horizontal position `16`, a crab with horizontal position `1`, and so on.

Each change of 1 step in horizontal position of a single crab costs 1 fuel. You could choose any horizontal position to align them all on, but the one that costs the least fuel is horizontal position `2`:

- Move from `16` to `2`: `14` fuel
- Move from `1` to `2`: `1` fuel
- Move from `2` to `2`: `0` fuel
- Move from `0` to `2`: `2` fuel
- Move from `4` to `2`: `2` fuel
- Move from `2` to `2`: `0` fuel
- Move from `7` to `2`: `5` fuel
- Move from `1` to `2`: `1` fuel
- Move from `2` to `2`: `0` fuel
- Move from `14` to `2`: `12` fuel

This costs a total of `37` fuel. This is the cheapest possible outcome; more expensive outcomes include aligning at position `1` (`41` fuel), position `3` (`39` fuel), or position `10` (`71` fuel).

Determine the horizontal position that the crabs can align to using the least fuel possible. **How much fuel must they spend to align to that position?**

To begin, get your puzzle input.

Answer:

Commit message:

Adding the info for the second part of day 7

2021/Day7/Day7.md, after:

[Back](../../README.md)

# --- Day 7: The Treachery of Whales ---
A giant [whale](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sperm_whale) has decided your submarine is its next meal, and it's much faster than you are. There's nowhere to run!

Suddenly, a swarm of crabs (each in its own tiny submarine - it's too deep for them otherwise) zooms in to rescue you! They seem to be preparing to blast a hole in the ocean floor; sensors indicate a **massive underground cave system** just beyond where they're aiming!

The crab submarines all need to be aligned before they'll have enough power to blast a large enough hole for your submarine to get through. However, it doesn't look like they'll be aligned before the whale catches you! Maybe you can help?

There's one major catch - crab submarines can only move horizontally.

You quickly make a list of the **horizontal position of each crab** (your puzzle input). Crab submarines have limited fuel, so you need to find a way to make all of their horizontal positions match while requiring them to spend as little fuel as possible.

For example, consider the following horizontal positions:

    16,1,2,0,4,2,7,1,2,14

This means there's a crab with horizontal position `16`, a crab with horizontal position `1`, and so on.

Each change of 1 step in horizontal position of a single crab costs 1 fuel. You could choose any horizontal position to align them all on, but the one that costs the least fuel is horizontal position `2`:

- Move from `16` to `2`: `14` fuel
- Move from `1` to `2`: `1` fuel
- Move from `2` to `2`: `0` fuel
- Move from `0` to `2`: `2` fuel
- Move from `4` to `2`: `2` fuel
- Move from `2` to `2`: `0` fuel
- Move from `7` to `2`: `5` fuel
- Move from `1` to `2`: `1` fuel
- Move from `2` to `2`: `0` fuel
- Move from `14` to `2`: `12` fuel

This costs a total of `37` fuel. This is the cheapest possible outcome; more expensive outcomes include aligning at position `1` (`41` fuel), position `3` (`39` fuel), or position `10` (`71` fuel).

Determine the horizontal position that the crabs can align to using the least fuel possible. **How much fuel must they spend to align to that position?**

To begin, get your puzzle input.

Your puzzle answer was *`329389`*.

he first half of this puzzle is complete! It provides one gold star: *

# --- Part Two ---

The crabs don't seem interested in your proposed solution. Perhaps you misunderstand crab engineering?

As it turns out, crab submarine engines don't burn fuel at a constant rate. Instead, each change of 1 step in horizontal position costs 1 more unit of fuel than the last: the first step costs `1`, the second step costs `2`, the third step costs `3`, and so on.

As each crab moves, moving further becomes more expensive. This changes the best horizontal position to align them all on; in the example above, this becomes `5`:

- Move from `16` to `5`: 66 fuel
- Move from `1` to `5`: `10` fuel
- Move from `2` to `5`: `6` fuel
- Move from `0` to `5`: `15` fuel
- Move from `4` to `5`: `1` fuel
- Move from `2` to `5`: `6` fuel
- Move from `7` to `5`: `3` fuel
- Move from `1` to `5`: `10` fuel
- Move from `2` to `5`: `6` fuel
- Move from `14` to `5`: `45` fuel

This costs a total of `168` fuel. This is the new cheapest possible outcome; the old alignment position (2) now costs `206` fuel instead.

Determine the horizontal position that the crabs can align to using the least fuel possible so they can make you an escape route! **How much fuel must they spend to align to that position?**

Answer:
